---
title: "emplace_back vs push_back"
date: 2022-04-02
---
The topic - or rather, this strand of idea, is about how to add elements to a vector.
### Main Idea
Both of these are methods of adding elements to a (templated) vector
Basically, `emplace_back` ensures that we create an object/struct/class in_place (that is, directly in the correct position) instead of creating it temporarily in an empty place and then calling the move constructor, which is essentially what `push_back` does. So for `emplace_back`, we can directly pass on the constructor arguments and it *implicitly* creates the object from it. So of course, `emplace_back` is faster than a call to `push_back`
Sourced from: https://stackoverflow.com/questions/4303513/push-back-vs-emplace-back

### So why use push_back at all ?
push_back may be necessary when we we want to ensure that the correct type is added to the vector, and no unnecessary type_deduction takes place. Here's an actually very cool example where using emplace_back would cause undetected silent errors - the worst kinds! 

**The example**

    std::vector<std::unique_ptr<T>> v;
    T a;
    v.emplace_back(std::addressof(a)); // compiles
    v.push_back(std::addressof(a)); // fails to compile

`std::unique_ptr<T>` has an explicit constructor from `T *`. Because `emplace_back` can call explicit constructors, passing a non-owning pointer compiles just fine. However, when `v` goes out of scope, the destructor will attempt to call `delete` on that pointer, which was not allocated by `new` because it is just a stack object. This leads to undefined behavior.


Sourced from: https://stackoverflow.com/q/10890653/8105391